Long time ago, the residents of this place were scattered. They survived through “kaingin” around the sites namely. Locdo, Bilayong, Kilawa, Nakatanglad, Tabagong, Kayamangon. Ilaaya and also below and beside the creek of Dalaingan River. The place before was a virgin forest, no one ever plows and cultivate this land since huge trees can be usually found, even carabaos and cows cannot be found anywhere in this place. The coldness of Dalaingan River before can be compared to the temperature inside our refrigerator as these days. The deep running water of this river of Kulasihan. The said river was so nice and clean that fishes stayed there peacefully and so with other animals found in water since no human being disturbed their living. 

The inhabitants love to eat the fishes in that river that live peacefully, happily and make use of the fertile land area where there is abundance of edible fruits around. Before, people easily captured wild animals such as wild pigs, wild chicken, and many others for their viands using a native tool.  The natives of this place had a unique kind of unity and camaraderie. They worked together blissfully form cultivating the caingin up to harvesting the fruits of their labor. They customarily gathered together for eating and having funds after working. Their togetherness was just like celebrating festivals, and they love merry making and dancing. These people in fact when one on them hunted wild deer he/they shared the meat to the whole villagers. Our forefathers at that time drunk rice wine when such occasion took place. Rice wine is good for their health.
 
The aforementioned natives were generous and hospitable, their visitors. They let their visitors feel at home. This hospitable asset they had made them easily to travel to another place even to the farthest place like Agusan, Misamis Oriental and Cabacan, Cotabato.

"Paradise Valley" as what people called BUGCAON today It was called Paradise Valley due to the coldness of this place. At first, natives were suspicious about the arrival of their Muslims, they thought these Muslims were there to conquer Paradise Valley.

Until there was a such a time natives urge to discover that the Musilims were there not to disturb their lives but to sell “Agong” and blanket which they precisely called “Ampic”. The blanket was used by the Muslims as their clock having a nice design of alluring blossoms of nicest flowers. The Muslim traders stayed in the Paradise Valley in a few days particularly in the Dalaingan River because they feel at ease and comfortable since “Dalaingan River” was clean and they haven’t difficulty about fetching water for their drinking because the river produced potable water supply. Besides staying in the Dalaingan River side make easy for them to take a bath, moreover, they won’t like to stay by the houses of the natives since the native people raised pigs in their backyard where Muslims cannot dare to take.

The Muslims traders brought “Bugca” which means is a native term of Lanzones fruits. Then time come that Muslims went back to Cabacan, Cotabato. They left the lanzones seeds scattered around the Paradise Valley. Then time went so fast that the “Bugca” seeds grow until it bears fruits that people like to eat. The people in the neighboring places of the Paradise Valley tempted to taste those fruits, then due to that, native’s bae this place “BUGCAON” meaning to say edible lanzones fruit where people enjoyed eating.

Bugcaon was named before the Spanish regime. Bugcaon was one of the three barangays of Bukidnon probably organized by Spaniards. The other two was Sumilao and Libona, as the Spaniards landed here, they were the one who Christianized the natives in fact Spaniard Priest was responsible of making Bugcaon  people to believe in Christianity. From then on, "BUGCAON" stand strongly until this time under R.A. 4787 dated June 18, 1968.
